"ChemCell WWW Site"_cws - "ChemCell Documentation"_cd - "ChemCell
Commands"_cc :c

:link(cws,http://www.cs.sandia.gov/~sjplimp/chemcell.html)
:link(cd,Manual.html)
:link(cc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

bin command :h3

[Syntax:]

bin keyword value(s) ... :pre

zero or more keyword/value pairs may be appended :l
valid keywords: {diff} or {gsize} or {gcount} or {react} or {rsize} or {rcount} :l
  {diff} value = D
    D = diffusion coefficient (cm^2/sec)
  {gsize} values = Lx Ly Lz
    Lx,Ly,Lz = geometry bin sizes in each dimension (microns)
  {gcount} values = Nx Ny Ny
    Nx,Ny,Nz = geometry bin count in each dimension
  {react} value = cutoff
    cutoff = max distance between a pair of reacting particles (microns)
  {rsize} values = Lx Ly Lz
    Lx,Ly,Lz = reaction bin sizes in each dimension (microns)
  {rcount} values = Nx Ny Ny
    Nx,Ny,Nz = reaction bin count per geometry bin in each dimension :pre

[Examples:]

bin diff 1.0e-8
bin react 0.02 diff 1.0e-7
bin count 30 35 40 :pre

[Description:]

Create two sets of bins that overlay the simulation domain.  Geometry
bins are used for storing the location of geometry elements (regions,
surface triangles) so that particles can be efficiently moved.
Reaction bins are used to quickly find pairs of nearby reacting
particles.  In general, simulations will run faster if these bin sizes
are as small as possible, while still meeting the constraints
described below.  However, this is not always the case, so this
command gives you the freedom to tune the performance of particular
simulations.

Geometry bins must be large enough that particles with the largest
diffusion coefficient will not move further than one bin length in a
single timestep. 

Reaction bins must be large enough that the largest distance at which
a pair of particles react is not greater than one bin length.
Additionally, reaction bins can be no larger than geometry bins and in
each dimension an integer number of reaction bins must fit inside each
geometry bin.  Thus, in a dimension, reaction bins can be equal in
size to geometry bins, or 1/2 size, or 1/3 size, etc.

The number and size of geometry bins is determined by using zero or
more of 3 keywords: {diff}, {gsize}, and {gcount}.  If multiple
keywords are used, the geometry bin size is set to the maximum of the
sizes induced by each keyword.  If none of the 3 keywords are used,
geometry bins are setup as if the {diff} keyword had been specified
with a diffusion coefficient of 0.0, which as described below is the
same as using the largest diffusion coefficient currently defined.
Note that the global simulation domain must have an integer number of
geometry bins in each dimension, so the bin size may be set slightly
larger than the values inferred by these keywords.

The {diff} keyword sets the geometry bin size to the maximum distance
a particle will move in one timestep, which depends on the specified
"diffusion"_diffusion.html coefficient, the "timestep"_timestep.html
size, and "move_style"_move_style.html settings.  If the specified
diffusion coefficient is 0.0, then ChemCell will compute the maximum
distance using the largest diffusion coefficient currently defined.
Note that if these values are changed after using the bin command
(e.g. you change the timestep or reset some particle's diffusion
coefficient), you may end up with an invalid geometry bin size.  Also
note that you can run ChemCell once (e.g. for zero timesteps) to see
the maximum diffusive distance printed out.

The {gsize} keyword sets the geometry bin size in each dimension
to the specified values.

The {gcount} keyword sets the number of geometry bins in each
dimension to the specified values.

The number and size of reaction bins is determined by using zero or
more of 3 keywords: {react}, {rsize}, and {rcount}.  If multiple
keywords are used, the reaction bin size is set to the maximum of the
sizes induced by each keyword.  If none of the 3 keywords are used,
reactions bins are set to the same size as the geometry bins.

The {react} keyword sets the reaction bin size in all 3 dimensions to
the specified size, which is assumed to be the largest distance at
which a binary reaction between 2 particles will occur.  If the
specified cutoff is 0.0, then the maximum reaction distance is
computed, which depends on "reaction rates"_reaction.html, the
"probability"_probability settings, the "timestep"_timestep.html, and
particle "diffusion"_diffusion.html coefficients.  Note that if these
values are changed after using the bin command (e.g. you change the
timestep or reset a reaction rate), you may end up with an invalid
reaction bin size.  Also note that you can run ChemCell once (e.g. for
zero timesteps) to see the maximum reaction distance printed out.

The {rsize} keyword sets the reaction bin size in each dimension
to the specified values.

The {rcount} keyword sets the number of reaction bins per geometry bin
to the specified values in each dimension.  E.g. a setting of rcount 1
1 1 will make reaction bins equal in size to the geometry bins.  A
setting of rcount 4 4 4 will put 64 reaction bins inside each geometry
bin.

[Restrictions:] 

This command can only be used for spatial simulations.

The "global"_global.html command must be used before this command, to
specify the size of the simulation box.

[Related commands:] none

[Default:]

Using the bin command with no arguments, sets geometry bins to the
size inferred by the maximum diffusivity of any particle, and sets
reaction bins to the same size as geometry bins.
