"ChemCell WWW Site"_cws - "ChemCell Documentation"_cd - "ChemCell
Commands"_cc :c

:link(cws,http://www.cs.sandia.gov/~sjplimp/chemcell.html)
:link(cd,Manual.html)
:link(cc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

run_style command :h3

[Syntax:]

run_style style :pre

style = {spatial} or {gillespie} or {ode} :ul

[Examples:]

run_style spatial
run_style gillespie :pre

[Description:]

Set the style of simulation that will be run. 

The {spatial} option runs a spatial reaction/diffusion model where
particles diffuse volumetrially (3d) or on surfaces (2d) via Brownian
motion with a diffusion coefficient defined by the
"diffusion"_diffusion.html command.  Particles store coordinates (see
the "particles"_particles.html command) and geometric surfaces can be
defined (see the "triangles"_triangles.html and "region"_region.html
commands) for particles to interact with (see the
"permeable"_permeable.html command).

In spatial simulations, pairs of particles react each timestep with a
probability between 0.0 and 1.0 if they are within a cutoff distance
of each other.  Reactions and associated rates are set via the
"reaction"_reaction.html command.  The "probability"_probability.html
or "react_modify"_react_modify.html commands are used to set the
probability and cutoff distance for individual reactions.  Setting the
probability to 1.0 and the cutoff distance to the binding radius
computed by the Smoldyn algorithms described in "(Andrews)"_#Andrews
enables a "Smoldyn-style"_smoldyn spatial simulation to be run.

The {gillespie} option runs the "Direct Method" version of Gillespie's
stochastic simulation algorithm (SSA) as described in
"(Gillespie)"_#Gillespie, with computational enhancments outlined in
"(Gibson)"_#Gibson.  Reactions and associated rates are set via the
"reaction"_reaction.html command.  The volume of the system is set via
the "volume"_volume.html command.  Initial particle counts are set via
the "count"_count.html command.  This is a non-spatial simulation, so
particle coordinates are not defined, nor are any geometric surfaces.

The {ode} option solves the system of coupled reaction ODEs with a
simple time integration scheme.  Reactions and associated rates are
set via the "reaction"_reaction.html command.  The volume of the
system is set via the "volume"_volume.html command.  Initial particle
counts are set via the "count"_count.html command.  This is a
non-spatial simulation, so particle coordinates are not defined, nor
are any geometric surfaces.

[Restrictions:] none

[Related commands:] none

[Default:] none

:line

:link(Gillespie)
[(Gillespie)] Gillespie, J Phys Chem, 81, 2340 (1977).

:link(Gibson)
[(Gibson)] Gibson and Bruck, J Phys Chem A, 104, 1876-1889 (2000).

:link(Andrews)
[(Andrews)] Andrews and Bray, Phys Biol, 1, 137-151 (2004).

:link(smoldyn,http://genomics.lbl.gov/~sandrews/software.html)
