"Previous Section"_Section_example.html - "ChemCell WWW Site"_cws -
"ChemCell Documentation"_cd - "ChemCell Commands"_cc - "Next
Section"_Section_modify.html :c

:link(cws,http://chemcell.sandia.gov)
:link(cd,Manual.html)
:link(cc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

5. Additional tools :h3

ChemCell is designed to be a computational kernel for performing
reaction/diffusion computations.  Additional pre- and post-processing
steps are typically needed to setup and analyze a simulation.

Our group has written and released a separate toolkit called
"Pizza.py"_pizza which provides tools for doing setup, analysis,
plotting, and visualization for ChemCell simulations.  Pizza.py is
written in "Python"_python and is available for download from "the
Pizza.py WWW site"_pizza.  Images and movies created by Pizza.py are
displayed on the "ChemCell WWW site"_cws.

:link(pizza,http://www.cs.sandia.gov/~sjplimp/pizza.html)
:link(python,http://www.python.org)

Pizza.py has a "cdata" tool with many sub-commands for reading and
creating regions, surfaces, particles.  The resulting geoemtries can
be visualized with other Pizza.py tools: "gl", "vcr", "raster", "svg",
etc.

Similarly, Pizza.py has a "dump" tool which reads in ChemCell dump
files and allows particles to be selected, visualized, and animated,
along with the ChemCell geoemtry (regions, triangulated surfaces) via
the same Pizza.py tools.

Pizza.py also has a "clog" tool which reads in ChemCell log files and
allows the species concentration statistics to be plotted either via
GnuPlot ("gnu" tool) or MatLab ("matlab" tool).

If you write additional tools (either stand-alone or as part of
Pizza.py) that you think are generally useful for setting up or
analyzing ChemCell simulations, send us an email; we can include them
as part of the ChemCell or Pizza.py packages.
