"ChemCell WWW Site"_cws :c
:link(cws,../chemcell.html)

:line

New Features and Bug Fixes in ChemCell :h3

This page lists new features and bug fixes in the ChemCell simulator
since the current version was released.

To add these features/fixes to your version of ChemCell, download the
current tarball from the "download page"_../download.html, which
includes all the new features/fixes listed below, and rebuild the
code.

The current version of ChemCell is 10 Sept 2008.

:line

[13 Mar 2009]

Made some enhancements to make particle binning more efficient for
problems where the natural diffusion length scale is different than
the reaction length scale.  Before ChemCell used one bin size for
finding geometry during particle moves and for finding reaction
partners during chemistry.  Now the "bin"_doc/bin.html command lets
you specify separate length scales leading to two different sets of
bins.  This can make a spatial simulation dramatically faster, if, for
example, you can use smaller reaction bins than geometry bins.

This is the "list of changed files"_patches/files.13Mar09 from the 19
Sept 2008 version.

Thanks to Steve Andrews (TMSI) for providing a problem that
illustrated this issue.

:line

[19 Sept 2008]

Fixed some incorrect filenames generated by the
"variable"_doc/variable.html command which would affect using
universe-style variables.

This is the "list of changed files"_patches/files.19Sep08 from the 18
Sept 2008 version.

:line

[18 Sept 2008]

Fixed some broken links in doc pages.  This is really a test of
the scripts I use to generate an updated tarball and the list of
patched files.

This is the "list of changed files"_patches/files.18Sep08 from the 10
Sept 2008 version.

:line

[10 Sept 2008]

Initial public release of ChemCell.  18,882 lines of code in src dir.
This version supercedes earlier distributed beta versions.
