"ChemCell WWW Site"_cws :c
:link(cws,../chemcell.html)

:line

Other Codes :h3

This page gives pointers to

"Other cell modeling codes"_#other - other cell modeling codes
"Visualization packages"_#viz - high quality visualization packages :ul

Other MD Codes :h4,link(otherMD)

These are freely-available molecular dynamics codes, most of them
parallel, which may be well-suited to the problems you want to model.
They can also be used in conjunction with LAMMPS to perform
complementary modeling tasks.

"CHARMM"_charmm
"AMBER"_amber
"NAMD"_namd
"NWCHEM"_nwchem
"DL_POLY"_dlpoly
"Tinker"_tinker :ul

:link(charmm,http://www.scripps.edu/brooks)
:link(amber,http://amber.scripps.edu)
:link(namd,http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/namd/)
:link(nwchem,http://www.emsl.pnl.gov/docs/nwchem/nwchem.html)
:link(dlpoly,http://www.cse.clrc.ac.uk/msi/software/DL_POLY)
:link(tinker,http://dasher.wustl.edu/tinker)

CHARMM, AMBER, NAMD, NWCHEM, and Tinker are designed primarily for
modeling biological molecules.  CHARMM and AMBER use
atom-decomposition (replicated-data) strategies for parallelism; NAMD
and NWCHEM use spatial-decomposition approaches, similar to LAMMPS.
Tinker is a serial code.  DL_POLY includes potentials for a variety of
biological and non-biological materials; both a replicated-data and
spatial-decomposition version exist.

:line

Visualization Packages :h4,link(viz)

The LAMMPS package itself includes only the simplest of "visualization
tools"_doc/Section_tools.html#xmovie.

These are high-quality visualization packages we recommend:

"Raster3d"_http://www.bmsc.washington.edu/raster3d/raster3d.html
"RasMol"_http://www.openrasmol.org
"VMD"_http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd
"AtomEye"_http://164.107.79.177/Archive/Graphics/A :ul

Our group has also written and released a separate toolkit called
"Pizza.py"_../pizza.html which provides tools for doing LAMMPS pre-
and post-processing, including visualization.  Pizza.py is written in
"Python"_http://www.python.org, is available for download from "this
page"_../download.html, and includes Python wrappers for the Raster3d
and RasMol packages listed above.

The company Scienomics has created an interface to LAMMPS as part of
their Materials and Processes Simulations (MAPS) platform which is
described at their "WWW page"_http://www.scienomics.com.  It can be
used to visualize and perform analysis on the output of LAMMPS
simulations.
