"ChemCell WWW Site"_cws :c
:link(cws,index.html)

:line

Pictures & Movies from ChemCell Simulations :h3

The images and movies on this page are from ChemCell simulations.

"endoplasmic reticulum"_#er: Ca++ ion release from endoplasmic reticulum
"E. Coli"_#ecoli: chemotaxis response by E. Coli
"Synechococcus"_#synecho: carbon fixation Synechococcus, a sea-water bacterium
"NF-kB immune response"_#immune: oscillatory immune response of the NF-kB network
"kinase cascade"_#kinase: 3-stage kinase cascade
"Lotka-Volterra"_#lotka: Lotka-Volterra predator-prey model :tb(s=:)

All of the images/movies are displayed in small size.  Click on an
image to view a larger version.  The animations and model images on
this page were made with the "Pizza.py
tool"_http://www.cs.sandia.gov/~sjplimp/pizza.html.  All of the movies
are in QuickTime format and are typically a few Mb in size (no more
than 15 Mb).

:line

Ca++ ion release from endoplasmic reticulum :h4,link(er)

This is work with Shawn Means (Sandia, now U of Auckland) to model
Ca++ ion releaes from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) through IP3R ion
channels.  Shawn and collaborators created a contiuum
reaction/diffusion PDE model for the system.  We modeled a portion of
it (IP3, IP3R, ER membrane, buffering species) with ChemCell to see if
we could get agreement with the continuum model.

The ER membrane was imaged and converted to a surface representation
of about 80K triangles.  IP3R channels are known to cluster in the ER
membrane which is thought to limit the amount of Ca++ released from
the ER stores due to gating of the channels by free Ca++ in the
cytoplasm.  Thus the channels can close themselves when a clustered
group releases a large amount of Ca++.  We modeled this effect by
simulating 2 scenarios: one with channels randomly dispersed in the
membrane, the other with channels clustered.  The total model contains
about 4M particles.

The 1st figure shows a schematic of the full model.  The 2nd figure is
the simulation box consisting of a small section of ER surrounded by
cytoplasm.  The 3rd figure is an animation of channel proteins
diffusing on the ER surface.  The 4th figure is a geometry where the
ion channels are clustered in the ER membrane.  The 5th figure is an
animation of the clustered geometry showing Ca++ escaping from the ER
in "puffs" of high concentration before the cytoplasmic buffer species
Calmodulin absorbs them.  The 6th figure and 7th figure are plots
comparing the continuum (MPSalsa) and stochastic (ChemCell)
simulations.  Free Ca++ concentrations in the ER and cytoplasm are
shown for both the dispersed and clustered channel geometries.
Continuum results are in black, the ChemCell results are in blue and
red.  The 8th figure shows how ChemCell running in parallel partitions
the simulation domain (for 64 processors) to try and get equal numbers
of particles on each processor.  The interior of the ER has a much
higher density of particles than the exterior.

:image(images/er_model_small.jpg,images/er_model.jpg)
:image(images/er_box_small.png,images/er_box.png)
:image(images/er_surf_small.jpg,movies/er_surf.mov)
:image(images/er_cluster_small.png,images/er_cluster.png)
:image(images/er_flux_small.jpg,movies/er_flux.mov)
:image(images/er_plot_er_small.jpg,images/er_plot_er.jpg)
:image(images/er_plot_cyto_small.jpg,images/er_plot_cyto.jpg)
:image(images/er_balance_small.png,images/er_balance.png)

This paper has details of the continuum model and continuum simulation
results:

[Reaction diffusion modeling of calcium dynamics with realistic ER
geometry], S. Means, A. J. Smith, J. Shepherd, J. Shadid, J. Fowler,
R. J. H. Wojcikiewicz, T. Mazel, G. D. Smith, B. S. Wilson,
Biophysical J, 91, 537-557 (2006).

:line

Chemotaxis response by E. Coli :h4,link(ecoli)

This is work to simulate the chemotaxis response in E. Coli using the
model developed by Lipkow, Andrews, and Bray (see citation below).

Chemotaxis is the process by which a bacterium like E. Coli responds
to stimulants or repellants in its external environment by altering
its swimming strategy.  E.g. an E. Coli cell will move towards food.
It occurs by membrane receptors binding to the stimulant molecule, and
a signal being transduced into the interior of the cell.
Phosphorylated proteins then diffuse from the end of the cell to
receptor binding sites at the base of flagella.  If they bind in
sufficient numbers before being dephosphorylated, then the polarity of
the flagella motors can flip (e.g. clockwise to counter-clockwise),
and the collective interaction of the several flagella can change the
swimming strategy of the cell from straight-line motion to tumbling or
vice versa.

This is a simulation of a portion of that process.  The 1st figure
shows the pill-shaped triangulated grid for an E. Coli cell.  The 2nd
figure shows the array of membrane receptors placed on one end of the
cell to detect the presence of a stimulant molecule exterior to the
cell and phosphorylate the appropriate cytoplasmic species.  The 3rd
figure shows the entire model, including cytoplasmic species and rings
of receptors at the base of flagella (not shown).  The 4th figure is
an animation of the chemtaxis response, where phosphorylated proteins
(red) are produced at the receptors (green) and diffuse thru the cell
volume, binding to the receptors (small colored rings) at the base of
the flagella.  One ring of receptors is shown in zoom-in mode where
the 2 colors (yellow,green) represent unbound and bound states.  The
5th figure is a plot of binding fraction versus time for the flagella
receptors, averaged over many independent runs.

:image(images/ecoli_grid_small.png,images/ecoli_grid.png)
:image(images/ecoli_receptors_small.png,images/ecoli_receptors.png)
:image(images/ecoli_model_small.png,images/ecoli_model.png)
:image(images/ecoli_movie_small.jpg,movies/ecoli.mov)
:image(images/ecoli_plot_small.jpg,images/ecoli_plot.jpg)

This problem is included in the ChemCell distribution in the examples
directory.

The first paper describes the E. Coli model and shows
"Smoldyn"_smoldyn results similar to these illustrated here for a
rectangular E. Coli cell.  The 2nd paper descibes the algorithms in
"Smoldyn"_smoldyn, the parameterization for which was used in these
ChemCell simulations.

[Simulated diffusion of phosphorylated Che{Y} through the cytoplasm of
Escherichia coli], K. Lipkow, S. S. Andrews, D. Bray, J Bacteriology,
187, 45-53 (2005).

[Stochastic simulation of chemical reactions with spatial resolution
and single molecule detail], S. S. Andrews and D. Bray, Physical
Biology, 1, 137-151 (2004).

:link(smoldyn,http://www.smoldyn.org)

:line

Carbon fixation in Synechococcus, a sea-water bacterium :h4,link(synecho)

Synechococcus sp. is a cyanobacterium that lives in the ocean and is
part of the global carbon cycle in that it converts inorganic carbon
(CO2) into organic carbon (sugars).  The key enzyme in this process is
Rubisco which is also present in plants as part of the photosynthetic
process.  To boost Rubisco's turnover rate, cyanobacteria have
organelles called carboxysomes which are thought to concentrate CO2 at
levels 50x higher than it is normally present in seawater.  Since
carboxysomes also contain Rubisco, the conversion to organic carbon
becomes more efficient.

This is a hi-level description of how the process works.  Bicarbonate
(HC03) permeates the cell membrane and enters the carboxysome.
Carbonic anhydrase converts HCO3 to CO2, concentrating it inside the
carboxysome, near the Rubisco enzyme.  When the enzyme is activated by
ribulose, it can convert CO2 into a 3-carbon precursor of organic
sugars.  The ChemCell model for this process has about 15 reactions
but is very simplified in that some reactions are idealized or
combined and reaction rates are not known for many of them.  Thus we
only expect results useful for qualitative comparisons.

The 1st figure is a micrograph of cyanobacteria cells with spherical
carboxysomes inside (see Fig 1 in [Microcompartments in Prokaryotes:
Carboxysomes and Related Polyhedra], G. C. Cannon, C. E. Bradburne,
H. C. Aldrich, S. H. Baker, S. Heinhorst, J. M. Shively, Appl and Env
Microbiology, 67, 5351-5361 (2001)). The 2nd figure is a schematic of
the carbon-concentration process in a cyanobacterium (sorry, missing a
citation).  The 3rd figure is a snapshot from ChemCell showing a
cut-away of a cylindrical cell with 5 carboxysomes inside.  Various
particle species inside the carboxysome, in the cytoplasm, and outside
the cell can be seen.  The 4th figure is a plot of organic carbon
production as the simulation proceeds; the 3 curves show qualitatively
different rates depending on where the Rubisco and carbonic-anhydrase
are placed geometrically in the model.

:image(images/synecho_expt_small.jpg,images/synecho_expt.jpg)
:image(images/synecho_model_small.jpg,images/synecho_model.jpg)
:image(images/synecho_ccell_small.jpg,images/synecho_ccell.jpg)
:image(images/synecho_plot_small.jpg,images/synecho_plot.jpg)

This paper has details about the "DOE Genomes-to-Life project"_gtl
that focused on Synechococcus:

:link(gtl,http://www.genomes2life.org)

[Carbon Sequestration in Synechococcus Sp.: From Molecular Machines to
Hierarchical Modeling], G. S. Heffelfinger, ..., S. J. Plimpton, ...,
OMICS - A Journal of Integrative Biology, 6, 305-330
(2002). ("abstract"_../abstracts/omics02.html)

:line

Oscillatory immune response of the NF-kB network :h4,link(immune)

This is work with Jaewook Joo (Sandia).  He developed a hybrid model
of the NF-kB immune response network (by combining two models in the
literature due to Alexander Hoffman and Tomasz Lipniacki).  Triggered
by receptor binding to a stimulant at the cell membrane, IKK is
produced inside the cell which is the starting point for the portion
of the network we modeled, which contains approximately 50 species and
70 reactions.  Eventually NF-kB, a gene transcription factor, is
produced and enters the nucleus.  Due to negative feedback in the
network, an oscillatory response of nuclear-NF-KB can result as it
shuttles in and out of the nucleus.

This non-spatial 2-compartment model was simulated in ChemCell both as
a continuum model (ODE solver) and a stochastic model (Gillespie SSA).
Runs in batches of 1000 and 10,000 were performed while varying
parameters in the model to perform senstivity analyses and classify
the various kinds of responses.  The image shows 4 plots for the
different observed responses: sustained oscillatory, damped
oscillatory, single-peaked, and hyperbolic (saturation to a maximum).
The red curves are the ODE solutions; the green are stochastic.  These
results indicate the stochastic noise present in real cells can blur
the distinction between the different responses and induce
oscillations.

:image(images/misl_plot_small.jpg,images/misl_plot.jpg)

This paper has further details on the NF-kB model and the analyses we
performed:

[Sensitivity Analysis of a Computational Model of the IKK-NF-kB-A20
Signal Transduction Network], J. Joo, S. J. Plimpton, S. Martin,
L. Swiler, J. L. Faulon, Annals of the New York Acadamey of Sciences,
Volume on Reverse Engineering Biological Networks, 1115, 221-239
(2007). ("abstract"_../abstracts/annals07.html)

:line

3-stage kinase cascade :h4,link(kinase)

This is a simple model of 3-stage kinase cascade (9 species, 7
reactions) where activated receptors can phosphorylate a first kinase
species.  It in turn, can activate a 2nd kinase species, which can
activate a 3rd kinase species.  The activated species, including the
receptor, de-activate over time.  This produces a cascading signal
where the concentrations of the succesive kinase species have reduced
intensity and their peaks are delayed in time.  In a spatial context
this could occur as the signal propagates into the cell.

The figure shows an animation of the model in a spherical cell.  The
1st kinase species is red, the 2nd is green, the 3rd is yellow.  A
plot is also shown of the concentration of each species versus time.
The black lines are the results for a non-spatial stochastic
(Gillespie) model of the same system.  In the spatial model, if
diffusion rates are lowered or the receptor is made a membrane-bound
species, then the system is no longer well-mixed and the spatial
results deviate from the non-spatial results.

:image(images/kinase_movie_small.jpg,movies/kinase.mov)

This example problem is included in the ChemCell distribution in the
examples directory.

:line

Lotka-Volterra predator-prey model :h4,link(lotka)

As described in the citation below, the Lotka-Volterra predator-prey
model can be formulated as a set of 3 simple reactions and 3 species
(predator, prey, food).  The predator eats the prey and the prey eats
the food.  Both can reproduce or die off.  Putting the model in a
spatial context means that the predator must diffuse around to find
prey.

The figure shows an animation of the model in a 3d rectangular box
that is narrow in the 3rd dimension.  The two species alternate
between hi and lo concentrations.  The plot shows the continuum (ODE)
solution and non-spatial stochastic solution (Gillepsie SSA) for this
model as well as the spatial result for one of the two species.  The
SSA also gives oscillations, but they are not as dramatic as in the
spatial context, illustrating how spatial concentration gradients can
amplify stochastic noise in the network pathways of cells.

:image(images/lotka_movie_small.jpg,movies/lotka.mov)

This example problem is included in the ChemCell distribution in the
examples directory.

This paper formulated the Lotka-Volterra equations as a diffusing-
particles-in-a-cell model and has more discussion of the significance
of the results for cell modeling in general:

[Stochastic simulation of chemical reactions with spatial resolution
and single molecule detail], S. S. Andrews and D. Bray, Physical
Biology, 1, 137-151 (2004).
